.\" Copyright 2003, Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-1.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_destroy 2 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
io_destroy \- destroy an asynchronous I/O context
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <linux/aio_abi.h>" "    /* Definition of " aio_context_t " */"
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "      /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.P
.BI "int syscall(SYS_io_destroy, aio_context_t " ctx_id );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IR Note :
you probably want to use the
.BR io_destroy (3)
wrapper function provided by
.IR libaio ;
see VERSIONS.
.P
The
.BR io_destroy ()
system call
will attempt to cancel all outstanding asynchronous I/O operations against
.IR ctx_id ,
will block on the completion of all operations
that could not be canceled, and will destroy the
.IR ctx_id .
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR io_destroy ()
returns 0.
On error,
\-1 is returned,
and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I ctx_id
was not a valid address.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The AIO context specified by
.I ctx_id
is invalid.
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.BR io_destroy ()
is not implemented on this architecture.
.SH VERSIONS
.UR https://pagure.io/libaio
.I libaio
.UE
provides a wrapper function with the same name,
but different prototype and return value.
You probably want to use that wrapper.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
Linux 2.5.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_cancel (2),
.BR io_getevents (2),
.BR io_setup (2),
.BR io_submit (2),
.BR io_destroy (3),
.BR aio (7)
.\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" Kent Yoder.
