.\" Copyright 2003, Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-1.0-or-later
.\"
.TH io_getevents 2 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
io_getevents \- read asynchronous I/O events from the completion queue
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <linux/aio_abi.h>" "    /* Definition of " *io_* " types */"
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "      /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.P
.BI "int syscall(SYS_io_getevents, aio_context_t " ctx_id ,
.BI "            long " min_nr ", long " nr ", struct io_event *" events ,
.BI "            struct timespec *" timeout );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IR Note :
you probably want to use the
.BR io_getevents (3)
wrapper function provided by
.IR libaio ;
see VERSIONS.
.P
The
.BR io_getevents ()
system call
attempts to read at least
.I min_nr
events and
up to
.I nr
events from the completion queue of the AIO context
specified by
.IR ctx_id .
.P
The
.I timeout
argument specifies the amount of time to wait for events,
and is specified as a relative timeout in a
.BR timespec (3)
structure.
.P
The specified time will be rounded up to the system clock granularity
and is guaranteed not to expire early.
.P
Specifying
.I timeout
as NULL means block indefinitely until at least
.I min_nr
events have been obtained.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR io_getevents ()
returns the number of events read.
This may be 0, or a value less than
.IR min_nr ,
if the
.I timeout
expired.
It may also be a nonzero value less than
.IR min_nr ,
if the call was interrupted by a signal handler.
.P
On error,
\-1 is returned,
and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
Either
.I events
or
.I timeout
is an invalid pointer.
.TP
.B EINTR
Interrupted by a signal handler;
see
.BR signal (7).
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I ctx_id
is invalid.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I min_nr
is out of range or
.I nr
is out of range.
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.BR io_getevents ()
is not implemented on this architecture.
.SH VERSIONS
.UR https://pagure.io/libaio
.I libaio
.UE
provides a wrapper function with the same name,
but different prototype and return value.
You probably want to use that wrapper.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
Linux 2.5.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR io_cancel (2),
.BR io_destroy (2),
.BR io_setup (2),
.BR io_submit (2),
.BR io_getevents (3),
.BR timespec (3),
.BR aio (7),
.BR time (7)
.\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" Kent Yoder.
