.\" Copyright 1996, Andries E. Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Copyright 2010, Jan Kara <jack@suse.cz>
.\" Copyright 2010, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH quotactl 2 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
quotactl, quotactl_fd \- manipulate disk quotas
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <xfs/xqm.h>" " /* Definition of " Q_X* " and " XFS_QUOTA_* \
" constants"
.RB    "                        (or " <linux/dqblk_xfs.h> "; see NOTES) */"
.B #include <sys/quota.h>
.P
.BI "int quotactl(int " op ", const char *_Nullable " special ", int " id ,
.BI "             caddr_t " addr );
.P
.BR "#include <xfs/xqm.h>" " /* Definition of " Q_X* " and " XFS_QUOTA_* \
" constants"
.RB    "                        (or " <linux/dqblk_xfs.h> "; see NOTES) */"
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "    /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.P
.BI "int syscall(SYS_quotactl_fd, int " fd ", int " op ", int " id \
", caddr_t " addr );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The quota system can be used to set per-user, per-group, and per-project limits
on the amount of disk space used on a filesystem.
For each user and/or group,
a soft limit and a hard limit can be set for each filesystem.
The hard limit can't be exceeded.
The soft limit can be exceeded, but warnings will ensue.
Moreover, the user can't exceed the soft limit for more than grace period
duration (one week by default) at a time;
after this, the soft limit counts as a hard limit.
.P
The
.BR quotactl ()
and
.BR quotactl_fd ()
calls manipulate disk quotas.
The difference between these functions is
the way the filesystem being manipulated is specified,
see description of the arguments below.
See NOTES for why one variant might be preferred over the other.
.P
The
.I op
argument indicates an operation to be applied to the user or
group ID specified in
.IR id .
To initialize the
.I op
argument, use the
.I QCMD(subop, type)
macro.
The
.I type
value is either
.BR USRQUOTA ,
for user quotas,
.BR GRPQUOTA ,
for group quotas, or (since Linux 4.1)
.\" 847aac644e92e5624f2c153bab409bf713d5ff9a
.BR PRJQUOTA ,
for project quotas.
The
.I subop
value is described below.
.P
For
.BR quotactl (),
the
.I special
argument is a pointer to a null-terminated string containing the pathname
of the (mounted) block special device for the filesystem being manipulated.
.P
For
.BR quotactl_fd (),
the
.I fd
argument is a file descriptor (which may be opened with the
.B O_PATH
flag) referring to a file or directory on the filesystem being manipulated.
.P
The
.I addr
argument is the address of an optional, operation-specific, data structure
that is copied in or out of the system.
The interpretation of
.I addr
is given with each operation below.
.P
The
.I subop
value is one of the following operations:
.TP
.BR Q_QUOTAON (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_QUOTAOFF (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_GETQUOTA (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_GETNEXTQUOTA (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_SETQUOTA (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_GETINFO (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_SETINFO (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_GETFMT (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_SYNC (2const)
.TQ
.BR Q_GETSTATS (2const)
.P
For XFS filesystems making use of the XFS Quota Manager (XQM),
the above operations are bypassed and the following operations are used:
.TP
.BR Q_XQUOTAON (2const)
.TP
.B Q_XQUOTAOFF
Turn off quotas for an XFS filesystem.
As with
.BR Q_XQUOTAON (2const),
XFS filesystems expect a pointer to an
.I "unsigned int"
that specifies whether quota accounting and/or limit enforcement need
to be turned off (using the same flags as for
.BR Q_XQUOTAON (2const)
operation).
This operation requires privilege
.RB ( CAP_SYS_ADMIN ).
The
.I id
argument is ignored.
.TP
.B Q_XGETQUOTA
Get disk quota limits and current usage for user
.IR id .
The
.I addr
argument is a pointer to an
.I fs_disk_quota
structure, which is defined in
.I <xfs/xqm.h>
as follows:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
/* All the blk units are in BBs (Basic Blocks) of
   512 bytes.  */
\&
#define FS_DQUOT_VERSION  1  /* fs_disk_quota.d_version */
\&
#define XFS_USER_QUOTA    (1<<0)  /* User quota type */
#define XFS_PROJ_QUOTA    (1<<1)  /* Project quota type */
#define XFS_GROUP_QUOTA   (1<<2)  /* Group quota type */
\&
struct fs_disk_quota {
    int8_t   d_version;   /* Version of this structure */
    int8_t   d_flags;     /* XFS_{USER,PROJ,GROUP}_QUOTA */
    uint16_t d_fieldmask; /* Field specifier */
    uint32_t d_id;        /* User, project, or group ID */
    uint64_t d_blk_hardlimit; /* Absolute limit on
                                 disk blocks */
    uint64_t d_blk_softlimit; /* Preferred limit on
                                 disk blocks */
    uint64_t d_ino_hardlimit; /* Maximum # allocated
                                 inodes */
    uint64_t d_ino_softlimit; /* Preferred inode limit */
    uint64_t d_bcount;    /* # disk blocks owned by
                             the user */
    uint64_t d_icount;    /* # inodes owned by the user */
    int32_t  d_itimer;    /* Zero if within inode limits */
                          /* If not, we refuse service */
    int32_t  d_btimer;    /* Similar to above; for
                             disk blocks */
    uint16_t d_iwarns;    /* # warnings issued with
                             respect to # of inodes */
    uint16_t d_bwarns;    /* # warnings issued with
                             respect to disk blocks */
    int32_t  d_padding2;  /* Padding \- for future use */
    uint64_t d_rtb_hardlimit; /* Absolute limit on realtime
                                 (RT) disk blocks */
    uint64_t d_rtb_softlimit; /* Preferred limit on RT
                                 disk blocks */
    uint64_t d_rtbcount;  /* # realtime blocks owned */
    int32_t  d_rtbtimer;  /* Similar to above; for RT
                             disk blocks */
    uint16_t d_rtbwarns;  /* # warnings issued with
                             respect to RT disk blocks */
    int16_t  d_padding3;  /* Padding \- for future use */
    char     d_padding4[8];   /* Yet more padding */
};
.EE
.in
.IP
Unprivileged users may retrieve only their own quotas;
a privileged user
.RB ( CAP_SYS_ADMIN )
may retrieve the quotas of any user.
.TP
.BR Q_XGETNEXTQUOTA " (since Linux 4.6)"
.\" commit 8b37524962b9c54423374717786198f5c0820a28
This operation is the same as
.BR Q_XGETQUOTA ,
but it returns (in the
.I fs_disk_quota
structure pointed by
.IR addr )
quota information for the next ID greater than or equal to
.I id
that has a quota set.
Note that since
.I fs_disk_quota
already has
.I q_id
field, no separate structure type is needed (in contrast with
.BR Q_GETQUOTA (2const)
and
.BR Q_GETNEXTQUOTA (2const)
operations)
.TP
.B Q_XSETQLIM
Set disk quota limits for user
.IR id .
The
.I addr
argument is a pointer to an
.I fs_disk_quota
structure.
This operation requires privilege
.RB ( CAP_SYS_ADMIN ).
.TP
.B Q_XGETQSTAT
Returns XFS filesystem-specific quota information in the
.I fs_quota_stat
structure pointed by
.IR addr .
This is useful for finding out how much space is used to store quota
information, and also to get the quota on/off status of a given local XFS
filesystem.
The
.I fs_quota_stat
structure itself is defined as follows:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
#define FS_QSTAT_VERSION 1  /* fs_quota_stat.qs_version */
\&
struct fs_qfilestat {
    uint64_t qfs_ino;       /* Inode number */
    uint64_t qfs_nblks;     /* Number of BBs
                               512\-byte\-blocks */
    uint32_t qfs_nextents;  /* Number of extents */
};
\&
struct fs_quota_stat {
    int8_t   qs_version; /* Version number for
                            future changes */
    uint16_t qs_flags; /* XFS_QUOTA_{U,P,G}DQ_{ACCT,ENFD} */
    int8_t   qs_pad;   /* Unused */
    struct fs_qfilestat qs_uquota;  /* User quota storage
                                       information */
    struct fs_qfilestat qs_gquota;  /* Group quota storage
                                       information */
    uint32_t qs_incoredqs;   /* Number of dquots in core */
    int32_t  qs_btimelimit;  /* Limit for blocks timer */
    int32_t  qs_itimelimit;  /* Limit for inodes timer */
    int32_t  qs_rtbtimelimit;/* Limit for RT
                                blocks timer */
    uint16_t qs_bwarnlimit;  /* Limit for # of warnings */
    uint16_t qs_iwarnlimit;  /* Limit for # of warnings */
};
.EE
.in
.IP
The
.I id
argument is ignored.
.TP
.B Q_XGETQSTATV
Returns XFS filesystem-specific quota information in the
.I fs_quota_statv
pointed to by
.IR addr .
This version of the operation uses a structure with proper versioning support,
along with appropriate layout (all fields are naturally aligned) and
padding to avoiding special compat handling;
it also provides the ability to get statistics regarding
the project quota file.
The
.I fs_quota_statv
structure itself is defined as follows:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
#define FS_QSTATV_VERSION1 1 /* fs_quota_statv.qs_version */
\&
struct fs_qfilestatv {
    uint64_t qfs_ino;       /* Inode number */
    uint64_t qfs_nblks;     /* Number of BBs
                               512\-byte\-blocks */
    uint32_t qfs_nextents;  /* Number of extents */
    uint32_t qfs_pad;       /* Pad for 8\-byte alignment */
};
\&
struct fs_quota_statv {
    int8_t   qs_version;    /* Version for future
                               changes */
    uint8_t  qs_pad1;       /* Pad for 16\-bit alignment */
    uint16_t qs_flags;      /* XFS_QUOTA_.* flags */
    uint32_t qs_incoredqs;  /* Number of dquots incore */
    struct fs_qfilestatv qs_uquota;  /* User quota
                                        information */
    struct fs_qfilestatv qs_gquota;  /* Group quota
                                        information */
    struct fs_qfilestatv qs_pquota;  /* Project quota
                                        information */
    int32_t  qs_btimelimit;   /* Limit for blocks timer */
    int32_t  qs_itimelimit;   /* Limit for inodes timer */
    int32_t  qs_rtbtimelimit; /* Limit for RT blocks
                                 timer */
    uint16_t qs_bwarnlimit;   /* Limit for # of warnings */
    uint16_t qs_iwarnlimit;   /* Limit for # of warnings */
    uint64_t qs_pad2[8];      /* For future proofing */
};
.EE
.in
.IP
The
.I qs_version
field of the structure should be filled with the version of the structure
supported by the callee (for now, only
.I FS_QSTAT_VERSION1
is supported).
The kernel will fill the structure in accordance with
version provided.
The
.I id
argument is ignored.
.TP
.BR Q_XQUOTARM " (buggy until Linux 3.16)"
.\" 9da93f9b7cdf8ab28da6b364cdc1fafc8670b4dc
Free the disk space taken by disk quotas.
The
.I addr
argument should be a pointer to an
.I "unsigned int"
value containing flags (the same as in
.I d_flags
field of
.I fs_disk_quota
structure)
which identify what types of quota
should be removed.
(Note that the quota type passed in the
.I op
argument is ignored, but should remain valid in order to pass preliminary
quotactl syscall handler checks.)
.IP
Quotas must have already been turned off.
The
.I id
argument is ignored.
.TP
.BR Q_XQUOTASYNC " (since Linux 2.6.15; no-op since Linux 3.4)"
.\" Added in commit ee34807a65aa0c5911dc27682863afca780a003e
This operation was an XFS quota equivalent to
.BR Q_SYNC (2const),
but it is no-op since Linux 3.4,
.\" 4b217ed9e30f94b6e8e5e262020ef0ceab6113af
as
.BR sync (1)
writes quota information to disk now
(in addition to the other filesystem metadata that it writes out).
The
.IR special ", " id " and " addr
arguments are ignored.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR quotactl ()
returns 0;
on error,
\-1 is returned,
and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I addr
or
.I special
is invalid.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I op
or
.I type
is invalid.
.TP
.BR EINVAL " (since Linux 5.5)"
.\" 3dd4d40b420846dd35869ccc8f8627feef2cff32
.I op
is
.BR Q_XQUOTARM ,
but
.I addr
does not point to valid quota types.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The file specified by
.I special
or
.I addr
does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOSYS
The kernel has not been compiled with the
.B CONFIG_QUOTA
option.
.TP
.B ENOTBLK
.I special
is not a block device.
.TP
.B EPERM
The caller lacked the required privilege
.RB ( CAP_SYS_ADMIN )
for the specified operation.
.TP
.B ESRCH
No disk quota is found for the indicated user.
Quotas have not been turned on for this filesystem.
.TP
.B ESRCH
.I op
is
.BR Q_XGETNEXTQUOTA ,
but there is no ID greater than or equal to
.I id
that has an active quota.
.SH NOTES
.SS Alternative XFS header
Instead of
.I <xfs/xqm.h>
one can use
.IR <linux/dqblk_xfs.h> ,
taking into account that there are several naming discrepancies:
.IP \[bu] 3
Quota enabling flags (of format
.BR XFS_QUOTA_[UGP]DQ_{ACCT,ENFD} )
are defined without a leading "X", as
.BR FS_QUOTA_[UGP]DQ_{ACCT,ENFD} .
.IP \[bu]
The same is true for
.B XFS_{USER,GROUP,PROJ}_QUOTA
quota type flags, which are defined as
.BR FS_{USER,GROUP,PROJ}_QUOTA .
.IP \[bu]
The
.I dqblk_xfs.h
header file defines its own
.BR XQM_USRQUOTA ,
.BR XQM_GRPQUOTA ,
and
.B XQM_PRJQUOTA
constants for the available quota types,
but their values are the same as for
constants without the
.B XQM_
prefix.
.SS quotactl() versus quotactl_fd()
The original
.BR quotactl ()
variant of this system call requires specifying
the block device containing the filesystem to operate on.
This makes it impossible to use
in cases where the filesystem has no backing block device
(e.g., tmpfs).
Even when the block device does exist,
it might be difficult to locate
(requires scanning
.I /proc/self/mounts
and even some filesystem-specific parsing in the case of,
for example,
bcachefs).
.BR quotactl_fd ()
instead works on the mount point,
which avoids this limitation and is simpler to use
(since the filesystem to manipulate
is typically specified by its mount point anyway).
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
.TP
.BR quotactl_fd ()
Linux 5.14.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quota (1),
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8)
