'\" t
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH statmount 2 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
statmount \- get a mount status
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <linux/mount.h>" "  /* Definition of STATMOUNT_* constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.P
.BI "int syscall(SYS_statmount, struct mnt_id_req *" req ,
.BI "            struct statmount *" smbuf ", size_t " bufsize ,
.BI "            unsigned long " flags );
.P
.B #include <linux/mount.h>
.fi
.P
.EX
.B struct mnt_id_req {
.BR "    __u32  size;" "        /* sizeof(struct mnt_id_req) */"
.B "    union {"
.BR "        __u32  mnt_ns_fd;" "  /* fd of mnt_ns to query the mnt_id in */"
.BR "        __u32  mnt_fd;" "     /* fd on the mount being queried */"
.B "    };"
.BR "    __u64  mnt_id;" "      /* The mnt_id being queried */"
.BR "    __u64  param;" "       /* ORed combination of the STATMOUNT_ constants */"
.BR "    __u32  mnt_ns_id;" "   /* The id of mnt_ns to query the mnt_id in */"
.B };
.P
.B struct statmount {
.B "    __u32  size;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_opts;"
.B "    __u64  mask;"
.B "    __u32  sb_dev_major;"
.B "    __u32  sb_dev_minor;"
.B "    __u64  sb_magic;"
.B "    __u32  sb_flags;"
.B "    __u32  fs_type;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_id;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_parent_id;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_id_old;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_parent_id_old;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_attr;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_propagation;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_peer_group;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_master;"
.B "    __u64  propagate_from;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_root;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_point;"
.B "    __u64  mnt_ns_id;"
.B "    __u32  fs_subtype;"
.B "    __u32  sb_source;"
.B "    __u32  opt_num;"
.B "    __u32  opt_array;"
.B "    __u32  opt_sec_num;"
.B "    __u32  opt_sec_array;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_uidmap_num;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_uidmap;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_gidmap_num;"
.B "    __u32  mnt_gidmap;"
.B "    __u64  supported_mask;"
.B "    char   str[];"
.B };
.EE
.P
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrapper for
.BR statmount (),
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
To access a mount's status,
the caller must have CAP_SYS_ADMIN in the user namespace.
In case of accessing a mount in a foreign mount namespace (specified via
.I req.mnt_ns_id
or
.IR req.mnt_ns_fd ),
the foreign mount namespace should be child of the current namespace.
.P
This function returns information about a mount,
storing it in the buffer pointed to by
.IR smbuf .
The returned buffer is a
.I struct statmount
which is of size
.I bufsize
with the fields filled in as described below.
.I flags
must either be 0 or
.BR STATMOUNT_BY_FD .
.P
(Note that reserved space and padding is omitted.)
.SS The mnt_id_req structure
.I req.size
is used by the kernel to determine which
.I struct\~mnt_id_req
is being passed in;
it should always be set to
.IR sizeof(struct\~mnt_id_req) .
.P
.I req.mnt_ns_fd
can be obtained from
.B PIDFD_GET_MNT_NAMESPACE
.BR ioctl (2)
operation or by opening a file descriptor to
.IR /proc/ pid /ns/mnt
and is used to specify a foreign mount namespace in which to query
.I req.mnt_id
(since Linux 6.18).
.P
.I req.mnt_fd
is a file descriptor on a mount.
If
.B STATMOUNT_BY_FD
flag is specified,
.I req.mnt_id
and
.I req.mnt_ns_id
are zeroed,
the function will return information about
the mount the file descriptor is on
(since Linux 7.0).
.P
The fd can also be on a mount that has been lazily unmounted (see
.BR umount2 (2)
with
.BR MNT_DETACH ).
In this case,
.B STATMOUNT_MNT_POINT
and
.B STATMOUNT_MNT_NS_ID
will be unset, since an unmounted mount is no longer a part of the filesystem.
.P
.I req.mnt_id
can be obtained from either
.BR statx (2)
using
.B STATX_MNT_ID_UNIQUE
or from
.BR listmount (2)
and is used as the identifier to query the status of the desired mount point.
.P
.I req.param
is used to tell the kernel which fields the caller is interested in.
It is an ORed combination of the following constants
.P
.in +4n
.TS
lB l.
STATMOUNT_SB_BASIC	/* Want/got sb_* */
STATMOUNT_MNT_BASIC	/* Want/got mnt_* */
STATMOUNT_PROPAGATE_FROM	/* Want/got propagate_from */
STATMOUNT_MNT_ROOT	/* Want/got mnt_root  */
STATMOUNT_MNT_POINT	/* Want/got mnt_point */
STATMOUNT_FS_TYPE	/* Want/got fs_type */
STATMOUNT_MNT_NS_ID	/* Want/got mnt_ns_id */
STATMOUNT_MNT_OPTS	/* Want/got mnt_opts */
STATMOUNT_FS_SUBTYPE	/* Want/got fs_subtype */
STATMOUNT_SB_SOURCE	/* Want/got sb_source */
STATMOUNT_OPT_ARRAY	/* Want/got opt_{num,array} */
STATMOUNT_OPT_SEC_ARRAY	/* Want/got opt_sec_{num,array} */
STATMOUNT_MNT_UIDMAP	/* Want/got uidmap{_num,} */
STATMOUNT_MNT_GIDMAP	/* Want/got gidmap{_num,} */
STATMOUNT_SUPPORTED_MASK	/* Want/got supported mask flags */
.TE
.in
.P
In general,
the kernel does
.I not
reject values in
.I req.param
other than the above.
(For an exception,
see
.B EINVAL
in errors.)
Instead,
it simply informs the caller which values are supported
by this kernel and filesystem via the
.I statmount.mask
field.
Therefore,
.I do not
simply set
.I req.param
to
.B UINT_MAX
(all bits set),
as one or more bits may,
in the future,
be used to specify an extension to the buffer.
.P
.I req.mnt_ns_id
can be obtained from
.B NS_GET_MNTNS_ID
.BR ioctl (2)
operation and is used to specify a foreign mount namespace in which to query
.I req.mnt_id
(since Linux 6.11).
.SS The returned information
The status information for the target mount is returned in the
.I statmount
structure pointed to by
.IR smbuf .
.P
The fields in the
.I statmount
structure are:
.TP
.I smbuf.size
The size of the returned
.I smbuf
structure,
including any of the strings fields that were filled.
.TP
.IR smbuf.mnt_opts " (since Linux 6.11)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains a comma separated list of mount options,
similiar to those in
.BR proc_pid_mountinfo (5) .
It is a null-terminated string.
.TP
.I smbuf.mask
The ORed combination of
.BI STATMOUNT_ *
flags indicating which fields were filled in and thus valid.
The kernel may return fields that weren't requested,
and may fail to return fields that were requested,
depending on what the backing file system and kernel supports.
In either case,
.I req.param
will not be equal to
.IR mask .
.TP
.I smbuf.sb_dev_major
.TQ
.I smbuf.sb_dev_minor
The device that is mounted at this mount point.
.TP
.I smbuf.sb_magic
The file system specific super block magic.
.TP
.I smbuf.sb_flags
The flags that are set on the super block,
an ORed combination of
.BR SB_RDONLY ,
.BR SB_SYNCHRONOUS ,
.BR SB_DIRSYNC ,
.BR SB_LAZYTIME .
.TP
.I smbuf.fs_type
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains the string representation of the mounted file system.
It is a null-terminated string.
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_id
The unique mount ID of the mount.
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_parent_id
The unique mount ID of the parent mount point of this mount.
If this is the root mount point then
.IR smbuf.mnt_id\~==\~smbuf.parent_mount_id .
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_id_old
This corresponds to the mount ID that is exported by
.IR /proc/ pid /mountinfo .
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_parent_id_old
This corresponds to the parent mount ID that is exported by
.IR /proc/ pid /mountinfo .
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_attr
The
.BI MOUNT_ATTR_ *
flags set on this mount point.
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_propagation
The mount propagation flags,
which can be one of
.BR MS_SHARED ,
.BR MS_SLAVE ,
.BR MS_PRIVATE ,
.BR MS_UNBINDABLE .
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_peer_group
The ID of the shared peer group.
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_master
The mount point receives its propagation from this mount ID.
.TP
.I smbuf.propagate_from
The ID from the namespace we propagated from.
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_root
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains the string representation of the mount
relative to the root of the file system.
It is a null-terminated string.
.TP
.I smbuf.mnt_point
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains the string representation of the mount
relative to the current root (ie if you are in a
.BR chroot ).
It is a null-terminated string.
.TP
.IR smbuf.mnt_ns_id " (since Linux 6.11)"
The unique ID of the mount namespace the mount belongs to.
.TP
.IR smbuf.fs_subtype " (since Linux 6.13)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains the string representation of the file system subtype.
This is particularly useful for disambiguating FUSE mounts.
It is a null-terminated string.
.TP
.IR smbuf.sb_source " (since Linux 6.13)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
that contains the source of the mount.
It is a null-terminated string.
.TP
.IR smbuf.opt_num " (since Linux 6.13)"
The number of filesystem options set on the mount.
.TP
.IR smbuf.opt_array " (since Linux 6.13)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains file system options separated by null bytes.
They can be iterated over with the help of
.IR smbuf.opt_num .
.TP
.IR smbuf.opt_sec_num " (since Linux 6.13)"
The number of security options set on the mount.
.TP
.IR smbuf.opt_sec_array " (since Linux 6.13)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains security options separated by null bytes.
They can be iterated over with the help of
.IR smbuf.opt_sec_num .
.TP
.IR smbuf.mnt_uidmap_num " (since Linux 6.15)"
The number of uid mappings applied on the mount.
If
.I smbuf.mask
has STATMOUNT_UIDMAP set and this field is 0,
the mount is not an idmapped mount.
.TP
.IR smbuf.mnt_uidmap " (since Linux 6.15)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains uid mappings as consecutive null-terminated strings.
They can be iterated over with the help of
.IR smbuf.mnt_uidmap_num .
The whole range of uid mappings must be resolvable in the user namespace
of the caller.
.TP
.IR smbuf.mnt_gidmap_num " (since Linux 6.15)"
The number of gid mappings applied on the mount.
If
.I smbuf.mask
has STATMOUNT_GIDMAP set and this field is 0,
the mount is not an idmapped mount.
.TP
.IR smbuf.mnt_gidmap " (since Linux 6.15)"
The offset to the location in the
.I smbuf.str
buffer that contains gid mappings as consecutive null-terminated strings.
They can be iterated over with the help of
.IR smbuf.mnt_gidmap_num .
The whole range of gid mappings must be resolvable in the user namespace
of the caller.
.TP
.IR smbuf.supported_mask " (since Linux 6.15)"
The ORed combination of
.BI STATMOUNT_ *
flags supported by the current kernel.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, zero is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EPERM
Permission is denied for accessing this mount.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I req
or
.I smbuf
points to a location outside the process's accessible
address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Invalid flag specified in
.IR flags .
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I req
is of insufficient size to be utilized.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Both
.I req.mnt_ns_id
and
.I req.mnt_ns_fd
were set.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I req.mnt_id
or
.I req.mnt_ns_id
was specified alongside
.IR req.mnt_fd .
.TP
.B EBADF
.I req.mnt_fd
is an invalid file descriptor.
.TP
.B E2BIG
.I req
is too large.
.TP
.B EOVERFLOW
The size of
.I smbuf
is too small to contain either the
.IR smbuf.fs_type ,
.IR smbuf.mnt_root ,
or
.IR smbuf.mnt_point .
Allocate a larger buffer and retry the call.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The specified
.I req.mnt_id
doesn't exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Out of memory (i.e., kernel memory).
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR listmount (2),
.BR statx (2)
