'\" t
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH aligned_alloc 3 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
aligned_alloc
\-
allocate aligned memory
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.P
.BI "void *aligned_alloc(size_t " alignment ", size_t " size );
.fi
.P
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.P
.BR aligned_alloc ():
.nf
    _ISOC11_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR aligned_alloc ()
allocates
.I size
bytes and returns a pointer to the allocated memory.
The memory address will be a multiple of
.IR alignment ,
which must be a power of two.
This address can later be successfully passed to
.BR free (3).
.P
The memory is not zeroed.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR aligned_alloc ()
returns a pointer to the allocated memory on success.
On error, NULL is returned, and
.I errno
is set
to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
The
.I alignment
argument was not a power of two.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Out of memory.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.na
.nh
.BR aligned_alloc ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH STANDARDS
C23,
POSIX.1-2024.
.SH HISTORY
glibc 2.16.
C11,
POSIX.1-2024.
.SH NOTES
On many systems there are alignment restrictions, for example, on buffers
used for direct block device I/O.
POSIX specifies the
.I "pathconf(path,_PC_REC_XFER_ALIGN)"
call that tells what alignment is needed.
Now one can use
.BR aligned_alloc ()
to satisfy this requirement.
.P
The glibc
.BR malloc (3)
always returns 8-byte aligned memory addresses,
so this function is needed
only if you require larger alignment values.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR brk (2),
.BR getpagesize (2),
.BR free (3),
.BR malloc (3)
