'\" t
.\" Copyright 2004, Andries E. Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Copyright 2020, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH llseek 3 (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
llseek \- reposition read/write file offset
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc ,\~ \-lc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BI "[[deprecated]] loff_t llseek(int " fd ", loff_t " offset ", int " whence );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is not the function you are interested in.
Look at
.BR _llseek (2),
.BR lseek (2),
or
.BR lseek64 (3).
.P
.\" For some background details, see:
.\" https://lore.kernel.org/linux-man/CAKgNAkhNSWR3uYhYYaxx74fZfJ3JrpfAAPVrK0AFk_cAOUsbDg@mail.gmail.com/
.\"
The type
.I loff_t
is a 64-bit signed type.
The
.BR llseek ()
library function is available in glibc and works without special defines.
However, the glibc headers do not provide a prototype.
Users should add
the above prototype, or something equivalent, to their own source.
When users complained about data loss caused by a miscompilation of
.BR e2fsck (8),
glibc 2.1.3 added the link-time warning
.P
.in +4n
"the \`llseek\' function may be dangerous;
use \`lseek64\' instead."
.in
.P
This makes this function unusable if one desires a warning-free
compilation.
.P
Since glibc 2.28,
.\" glibc commit 5c5c0dd747070db624c8e2c43691cec854f114ef
this function symbol is no longer available to newly linked applications.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR _llseek (2),
.BR lseek (2),
.BR lseek64 (3)
