.\" Copyright 1996, Andries E. Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Copyright 2010, Jan Kara <jack@suse.cz>
.\" Copyright 2010, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH dqblk 2type (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
dqblk
\-
disk quota block
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/quota.h>
.fi
.P
.EX
struct dqblk {
	uint64_t  dqb_bhardlimit;
	uint64_t  dqb_bsoftlimit;
	uint64_t  dqb_curspace;
	uint64_t  dqb_ihardlimit;
	uint64_t  dqb_isoftlimit;
	uint64_t  dqb_curinodes;
	uint64_t  dqb_btime;
	uint64_t  dqb_itime;
\&
	uint32_t  dqb_valid;
};
\&
#define QIF_BLIMITS   1
#define QIF_SPACE     2
#define QIF_ILIMITS   4
#define QIF_INODES    8
#define QIF_BTIME     16
#define QIF_ITIME     32
#define QIF_LIMITS    (QIF_BLIMITS | QIF_ILIMITS)
#define QIF_USAGE     (QIF_SPACE | QIF_INODES)
#define QIF_TIMES     (QIF_BTIME | QIF_ITIME)
#define QIF_ALL       (QIF_LIMITS | QIF_USAGE | QIF_TIMES)
.EE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP
.I .dqb_bhardlimit
.TQ
.I .dqb_bsoftlimit
Absolute and preferred limits on disk quota blocks.
.TP
.I .dqb_curspace
Current occupied space (in bytes).
.TP
.I .dqb_ihardlimit
.TQ
.I .dqb_isoftlimit
Absolute and preferred limits on number of allocated inodes.
.TP
.I .dqb_curinodes
Current number of allocated inodes.
.TP
.I .dqb_btime
Time limit for excessive disk use.
.TP
.I .dqb_itime
Time limit for excessive files.
.TP
.I .dqb_valid
Bit mask of
.BI QIF_ *
constants.
It is set to indicate which fields in the
.I dqblk
structure are valid.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
Linux 2.4.22.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR Q_GETQUOTA (2const),
.BR Q_SETQUOTA (2const),
.BR nextdqblk (2type)
