.\" Copyright 1996, Andries E. Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Copyright 2010, Jan Kara <jack@suse.cz>
.\" Copyright 2010, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH dqinfo 2type (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
dqinfo
\-
disk quota information
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/quota.h>
.fi
.P
.EX
struct dqinfo {
	uint64_t  dqi_bgrace;
	uint64_t  dqi_igrace;
	uint32_t  dqi_flags;
	uint32_t  dqi_valid;
};
\&
/* Quota format QFMT_VFS_OLD */
#define DQF_ROOT_SQUASH (1 << 0)
\&
/* Quota format QFMT_VFS_V0 / QFMT_VFS_V1 */
#define DQF_SYS_FILE    (1 << 16)
\&
#define IIF_BGRACE  1
#define IIF_IGRACE  2
#define IIF_FLAGS   4
#define IIF_ALL     (IIF_BGRACE | IIF_IGRACE | IIF_FLAGS)
.EE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS struct dqinfo
.TP
.I .dqi_bgrace
Time before block soft limit becomes hard limit.
.TP
.I .dqi_igrace
Time before inode soft limit becomes hard limit.
.TP
.I .dqi_flags
Flags for quotafile
.RB ( DQF_\f[I]*\f[] ).
\&
.TP
.I .dqi_valid
Bit mask of
.BI IIF_ *
constants.
It is set to indicate which fields in the
.I dqinfo
structure are valid.
.SS
.BI DQF_ *
.TP
.B DQF_ROOT_SQUASH
Root squash enabled.
.TP
.B DQF_SYS_FILE
Quota stored in a system file.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
Linux 2.4.22.
.P
Before Linux 4.0,
.B DQF_ROOT_SQUASH
had been defined privately as
.BR V1_DQF_RSQUASH .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR Q_GETINFO (2const),
.BR Q_SETINFO (2const)
