.\" Copyright 1996, Andries E. Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Copyright 2010, Jan Kara <jack@suse.cz>
.\" Copyright 2010, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright, the authors of the Linux man-pages project
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: Linux-man-pages-copyleft
.\"
.TH fs_disk_quota 2type (date) "Linux man-pages (unreleased)"
.SH NAME
fs_disk_quota
\-
filesystem disk quota
.SH LIBRARY
Standard C library
.RI ( libc )
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <xfs/xqm.h>
.fi
.P
.EX
#define FS_DQUOT_VERSION  1  // fs_disk_quota.d_version
.P
#define XFS_USER_QUOTA    (1<<0)  // User quota type
#define XFS_PROJ_QUOTA    (1<<1)  // Project quota type
#define XFS_GROUP_QUOTA   (1<<2)  // Group quota type
.P
struct fs_disk_quota {
	int8_t    d_version;
	int8_t    d_flags;
	uint16_t  d_fieldmask;
	uint32_t  d_id;
	uint64_t  d_blk_hardlimit;
	uint64_t  d_blk_softlimit;
	uint64_t  d_ino_hardlimit;
	uint64_t  d_ino_softlimit;
	uint64_t  d_bcount;
	uint64_t  d_icount;
	int32_t   d_itimer;
	int32_t   d_btimer;
	uint16_t  d_iwarns;
	uint16_t  d_bwarns;
	int32_t   d_padding2;
	uint64_t  d_rtb_hardlimit;
	uint64_t  d_rtb_softlimit;
	uint64_t  d_rtbcount;
	int32_t   d_rtbtimer;
	uint16_t  d_rtbwarns;
	int16_t   d_padding3;
	char      d_padding4[8];
};
.EE
.SH DESCRIPTION
All the blk units are in BBs (Basic Blocks) of 512 bytes.
.TP
.I .d_version
Version of this structure.
.TP
.I .d_flags
.BR XFS_ { USER , PROJ , GROUP } _QUOTA
.TP
.I .d_fieldmask
Field specifier.
.TP
.I .d_id
User, project, or group ID.
.TP
.I .d_blk_hardlimit
Absolute limit on disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_blk_softlimit
Preferred limit on disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_ino_hardlimit
Maximum # allocated inodes.
.TP
.I .d_ino_softlimit
Preferred inode limit.
.TP
.I .d_bcount
# disk blocks owned by the user.
.TP
.I .d_icount
# inodes owned by the user.
.TP
.I .d_itimer
Zero if within inode limits;
if not, we refuse service.
.TP
.I .d_btimer
Similar to above;
for disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_iwarns
# warnings issued with respect to # of inodes.
.TP
.I .d_bwarns
# warnings issued with respect to disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_padding2
Padding;
reserved for future use.
.TP
.I .d_rtb_hardlimit
Absolute limit on realtime (RT) disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_rtb_softlimit
Preferred limit on RT disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_rtbcount
# realtime blocks owned.
.TP
.I .d_rtbtimer
Similar to above;
for RT disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_rtbwarns
# warnings issued with respect to RT disk blocks.
.TP
.I .d_padding3
Padding;
reserved for future use.
.TP
.I .d_padding4[8]
Yet more padding.
.SH STANDARDS
Linux.
.SH HISTORY
Linux.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR Q_XGETQUOTA (2const),
.BR Q_XGETNEXTQUOTA (2const),
.BR Q_XSETQLIM (2const)
